Statistical tests involve hypotheses. Often one wishes to test a new theory against the “conventional wisdom.” The latter implies the “null hypothesis,” denoted H₀; the “alternative hypothesis,” H₁, is that implied by the theory one hopes to verify.

Many hypotheses entail one-tailed tests, specifying the direction of a difference, effect, or relationship. So H₁ will involve a “<” or “>” relation, and H₀ a "≥" or "≤" relation. In contrast, in a two-tailed test, the H₁ relation is "≠" and the H₀ is “=”. These remarks apply to the Mean, Means, and Correlation tests. In the case of a 2x2 Contingency table, if the variables are not independent, the relation between them has an implied direction, so a one-tailed is appropriate, but if the table is larger, only a two-tailed test usually makes sense.

When you have entered the data, selected the appropriate hypotheses, and pressed the Analyze button, the Data Analysis report will display a probability, as well as other information. This is the probability of the observed data occurring by chance under the assumption of the null hypothesis. Prior to running the test, you should have decided on a significance level, typically 0.05 (5%), but sometimes 0.1 or 0.01. If the probability under H₀ is less than this, then H₀ is rejected and the alternative, H₁, is accepted. Otherwise H₀ is not rejected; the evidence for H₁, if any, is not strong enough.

Here is an example: In the United States the Democratic party tends to favor fiscal stimulus policies more than the Republican party, so we might conjecture that the annual growth rate of the Gross Domestic Product of the U.S. tends to be higher under Democratic administrations. We collect the real (constant-dollar) GDP numbers (data for 1929-2009 can be found in the Economic Report of the President, available online) and compute the percentage changes. We are comparing two populations, so we choose Means and enter the numbers for Democrats as the first sample and the numbers for Republicans as the second. For our hypotheses, we enter   H₁: µ₁ > µ₂. (The probability turns out to be 0.006, so we can accept this hypothesis with considerable confidence. Of course the reason for this result may turn out to be different than that suggested here.)
